---
layout: post
title: "How do Ice Skates Work?"
date: 2022-02-09 18:03:23 +0800
categories: questions
---

The Winter Olympics are here, and while watching the ice-skating competitions, the age-old question occurred to me. How exactly do ice skates work? We know that ice is slippery by virtue of its structure (enter paper here), but ice skating is different from the regular slip and slide on ice that we experience. For a start, you can glide a very long distance on skates before stopping, whereas you can only slide for a few meters on shoes. Also, there is a trail left where the blades of the skates have passed, suggesting that the blades cause some sort of irreversible change to the ice. 


The generally accepted answer to this question is that the pressure from the blades causes the ice to melt, making it more slippery, as well as creating the trails. Naturally, we should try and check if this is reasonable, using speed skating skates as an example. Utilizing the phase diagram of water, and assuming the weight of the average human being to be $$ 65 \,\mathrm{kg} $$, the air pressure to be $$ 100 \,\mathrm{kPa} $$, the blade length to be $$ 45 \,\mathrm{cm} $$ and width to be $$ 1.1 \,\mathrm{mm} $$, we can perform calculations on under what temperatures the blades would be able to melt the ice. The pressure created by under such assumptions is approximately $$ 640 \,\mathrm{kPa} $$. If we consult a phase diagram of water such as this, we will see that this much change in pressure only amounts to a slight decrease(about $$ <5^\circ \mathrm{C} $$) in the melting point of ice, and therefore the pressure explanation cannot explain ice skating in anywhere that is more than a couple degrees Celsius below zero.



Upon further research, this question proves to be far from trivial. [This paper](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0020746215000335) by Martine Le Berre and Yves Pomeau discusses in length the physics behind ice skating. They show that the low friction between ice skates and ice is due to a thin, yet macroscopic layer of water which exists due to the heat generated by the friction between ice and blade. The exact physics behind this explanation are quite complicated, and this goes to show how fascinatingly complex some phenomena are that we take for granted.